.. _tutorial_cellplex_sc3_v3_nextgem_di_cellplex_jurkat_raji_10k_multiplex:

######################################################
 10k 1:1 Mixture of Raji and Jurkat Cells Multiplexed
######################################################

**Dataset**: 10k 1:1 Mixture of Raji and Jurkat Cells Multiplexed, 2
CMOs

The detailed description of this dataset can be found here_.

.. _here: https://www.10xgenomics.com/resources/datasets/10-k-1-1-mixture-of-raji-and-jurkat-cells-multiplexed-2-cm-os-3-1-standard-6-0-0

|

*************
 Preparation
*************

Download fastq files.

.. code:: console

   $ wget https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/10x.files/samples/cell-exp/6.0.0/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_Multiplex/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_Multiplex_fastqs.tar

   $ tar xvf SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_Multiplex_fastqs.tar

Combine reads of different lanes.

.. code:: console

   $ cat SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_?_multiplexing_capture/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_?_multiplexing_capture_S1_L00?_R1_001.fastq.gz > SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_1_multiplexing_capture_S1_combined_R1_001.fastq.gz

   $ cat SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_?_multiplexing_capture/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_?_multiplexing_capture_S1_L00?_R2_001.fastq.gz > SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_1_multiplexing_capture_S1_combined_R2_001.fastq.gz

Download cell barcode info. These are the cell-associated barcodes in
this single cell RNA-Seq library (determined by the number of
transcriptomic UMIs captured per barcode).

.. code:: console

   $ wget https://cf.10xgenomics.com/samples/cell-exp/6.0.0/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_Multiplex/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_Multiplex_multiplexing_analysis_assignment_confidence_table.csv

   $ cut -d ',' -f4 SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_Multiplex_multiplexing_analysis_assignment_confidence_table.csv | sed 's/-1//g' > cell_barcodes.txt

Inspect cell barcodes.

.. code:: console

   $ head cell_barcodes.txt

   AAACCCAAGAGTGTGC
   AAACCCAAGATGCTTC
   AAACCCAAGGTACAGC
   AAACCCAAGTAGCTCT
   AAACCCACACGGATCC
   AAACCCACAGACCCGT
   AAACCCACATTCCTAT
   AAACCCAGTACTCCGG
   AAACCCATCATGCGGC
   AAACCCATCGACGCTG

Prepare feature barcodes (cell multiplexing oligos, CMOs).

.. code:: console

   $ wget https://cf.10xgenomics.com/samples/cell-exp/6.0.0/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_Multiplex/SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_Multiplex_count_feature_reference.csv

   $ cut -d',' -f1,5 SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_Multiplex_count_feature_reference.csv | sed 's/,/\t/g' | grep ^C > feature_barcodes.txt

Inspect feature barcodes.

.. code:: console

   $ cat feature_barcodes.tsv

   CMO301  ATGAGGAATTCCTGC
   CMO302  CATGCCAATAGAGCG
   CMO303  CCGTCGTCCAAGCAT
   CMO304  AACGTTAATCACTCA
   CMO305  CGCGATATGGTCGGA
   CMO306  AAGATGAGGTCTGTG
   CMO307  AAGCTCGTTGGAAGA
   CMO308  CGGATTCCACATCAT
   CMO309  GTTGATCTATAACAG
   CMO310  GCAGGAGGTATCAAT
   CMO311  GAATCGTGATTCTTC
   CMO312  ACATGGTCAACGCTG

|

****
 QC
****

Sample the first 100,000 (default, set by ``-n``) read pairs for quality
control. Use ``-t`` to set the number of threads. Use
``--output_directory`` to set the output directory (default ``qc``). By
default, full length of read 1 and read 2 are searched against reference
cell and feature barcodes, respectively. The per base content of both
read pairs and the distribution of matched barcode positions are
summarized. Use ``-r1_coords`` and/or ``-r2_coords`` to limit the search
range. Use ``-cb_n`` and/or ``-fb_n`` to set the mismatch tolerance for
cell and feature barcode matching (default ``3``).

.. code:: console

   $ fba qc \
       -1 ../SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_1_multiplexing_capture_S1_combined_R1_001.fastq.gz \
       -2 ../SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_1_multiplexing_capture_S1_combined_R2_001.fastq.gz \
       -w cell_barcodes.txt \
       -f feature_barcodes.tsv \
       --output_directory qc \
       -r1_c 0,16

This library was constructed using Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3สน
Reagent Kits v3.1 (Dual Index) with Feature Barcode technology for Cell
Multiplexing and sequenced on Illumina NovaSeq 6000. The first 16 bases
are cell barcodes and the following 12 bases are UMIs. Based on the base
content plot, the GC content of cell barcodes are quite even. The UMIs
are slightly T enriched.

.. image:: Pyplot_read1_per_base_seq_content.webp
   :width: 350px
   :align: center

As for read 2, based on the per base content, it suggests that bases
0-14 are feature barcodes (CMOs, 15 bp). Bases 15-36 are constant and we
can almost read the bases (``GCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGG``). They are
actually `Capture Sequence 2`_. The next 12 bases are UMIs, and followed
by 16-base cell barcodes. Bases 37-54 are reverse complement to the read
1. The size of the CellPlex library is relatively small, read 2 has also
sequenced through part of the Nextera Read 1 sequencing primer
(constant, bases 55-79). Actually, read 1 is not needed, read 2 has cell
barcodes, UMIs and CMOs, all the info we need for demultiplexing.
Theoretically, we could utilize the cell barcodes and UMIs on both reads
to account for PCR, sequencing errors to further improve demultiplexing
accuracy.

.. _capture sequence 2: https://assets.ctfassets.net/an68im79xiti/6G2iPa3N9L3ZtsSCJlR3yO/dd9e4749ebb7f7894f193db1ddd148bb/CG000388_ChromiumNextGEMSingleCell3-v3.1_CellMultiplexing_RevB.pdf

.. image:: Pyplot_read2_per_base_seq_content.webp
   :width: 800px
   :align: center

|

Most of the reads have the correct structure.

.. image:: Pyplot_read2_barcodes_starting_ending.webp
   :width: 800px
   :align: center

The detailed ``qc`` results are stored in
``feature_barcoding_output.tsv.gz`` file. ``matching_pos`` columns
indicate the matched positions on reads. ``matching_description``
columns indicate mismatches in substitutions:insertions:deletions
format.

.. code:: console

   $ gzip -dc qc/feature_barcoding_output.tsv.gz | head

   read1_seq       cell_barcode    cb_matching_pos cb_matching_description read2_seq       feature_barcode fb_matching_pos fb_matching_description
   AAGCGTTAGAGTCTTTggtatttttatt    AAGCGTTAGAAGCCTG        0:15    2:0:1   ATGAGGAATTCCTGCGCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGGAATAAAACTACCAAAGACTCTAACGCTTCTGTCTCTTATACACATCTGACGCT      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC     0:15    0:0:0
   ATCTCTACAACCCACGctttattgttta    ATCTCTAGTACCCACG        0:16    2:0:0   ATGAGGAATTCCTGCGCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGGTAAACAATAAAGCGTGGGTTGTAGAGATCTGTCTCTTATACACATCTGACGCT      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC     0:15    0:0:0
   TGCTTCGAGCATGATGttctgagccggt    TGCTTCGAGATTGAGT        0:15    2:0:1   CATGCCAATAGAGCGGCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGGACCGGCTCAGAACATCATGCTCGAAGCACTGTCTCTTATACACATCTGACGCT      CMO302_CATGCCAATAGAGCG     0:15    0:0:0
   CGGGACTGTAGTATAGacctaattttcc    CGGGACTGTAAGCAAT        0:14    1:0:2   CATGCCAATAGAGCGGCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGGGGAAAATTAGGTCTATACTACAGTCCCGCTGTCTCTTATACACATCTGACGCT      CMO302_CATGCCAATAGAGCG     0:15    0:0:0
   TCACTCGCAATTTCGGaacatggacatc    TCACTCGCACCATTCC        0:14    1:0:2   ATGAGGAATTCCTGCGCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGGGAAGTCCATGTTCCGAAATTGCGAGTGACTGTCTCTTATACACATCTGACGCT      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC     0:15    0:0:0
   AGTTAGCAGACGTAGTgccttaatttgg    AGTTAGCAGAGCATTA        0:14    1:0:2   CATGCCAATAGAGCGGCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGGCCAAATTAAGGCACTACGTCTGCTAACTCTGTCTCTTATACACATCTGACGCT      CMO302_CATGCCAATAGAGCG     0:15    0:0:0
   GTCCCATTCTAAACGTtgagtacgagcg    CATCCCATCCTAAACG        0:15    2:0:1   CATGCCAATAGAGCGGCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGGCGCTCGTACTCAACGTTTAGAATGGGACCTGTCTCTTATACACATCTGACGCT      CMO302_CATGCCAATAGAGCG     0:15    0:0:0
   CAGAGCCCAATAGGGCcaccctcttaac    CAGAGCCGTATAGGGC        0:16    2:0:0   ATGAGGAATTCCTGCGCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGGGTTAAGAGGGTGGCCCTATTGGGCTCTGCTGTCTCTTATACACATCTGACGCT      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC     0:15    0:0:0
   AACCCAATCAGTTGTAggatattcacct    AACCCAACAGCATTGT        0:15    0:1:2   ATGAGGAATTCCTGCGCTCACCTATTAGCGGCTAAGGAGGTGAATATCCTACAACTGATTGGGTTCTGTCTCTTATACACATCTGACGCT      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC     0:15    0:0:0

|

********************
 Barcode extraction
********************

The lengths of cell and feature barcodes (CMOs) are all identical (16
and 15, respectively). And based on the ``qc`` results, the
distributions of starting and ending positions of cell and feature
barcodes are very uniform. Search ranges are set to ``0,16`` on read 1
and ``0,15`` on read 2. Two mismatches for cell and one mismatch for
feature barcodes (set by ``-cb_m``, ``-cf_m``) are allowed. By default,
three ambiguous nucleotides (Ns) for read 1 and read2 (set by ``-cb_n``,
``-cf_n``) are allowed.

.. code:: console

   $ fba extract \
       -1 ../SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_1_multiplexing_capture_S1_combined_R1_001.fastq.gz \
       -2 ../SC3_v3_NextGem_DI_CellPlex_Jurkat_Raji_10K_1_multiplexing_capture_S1_combined_R2_001.fastq.gz \
       -w cell_barcodes.txt \
       -f feature_barcodes.tsv \
       -o feature_barcoding_output.tsv.gz \
       -r1_c 0,16 \
       -r2_c 0,15 \
       -cb_m 2 \
       -fb_m 1 \
       -cb_n 3 \
       -fb_n 3

Preview of result.

.. code:: console

   $ gzip -dc feature_barcoding_output.tsv.gz | head

   read1_seq       cell_barcode    cb_num_mismatches       read2_seq       feature_barcode fb_num_mismatches
   AAGCGTTAGAGTCTTTggtatttttatt    AAGCGTTTCAGTCTTT        2       ATGAGGAATTCCTGCgctcacctattagcggctaaggaataaaactaccaaagactctaacgcttctgtctcttatacacatctgacgct      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC  0
   ATCTCTACAACCCACGctttattgttta    ATCTCTAGTACCCACG        2       ATGAGGAATTCCTGCgctcacctattagcggctaaggtaaacaataaagcgtgggttgtagagatctgtctcttatacacatctgacgct      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC  0
   TCACTCGCAATTTCGGaacatggacatc    TCACTCGCAGTTTCAG        2       ATGAGGAATTCCTGCgctcacctattagcggctaagggaagtccatgttccgaaattgcgagtgactgtctcttatacacatctgacgct      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC  0
   CAGAGCCCAATAGGGCcaccctcttaac    CAGAGCCGTATAGGGC        2       ATGAGGAATTCCTGCgctcacctattagcggctaagggttaagagggtggccctattgggctctgctgtctcttatacacatctgacgct      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC  0
   TGAGGGACATGCCAATcattttgaattt    TGAGGGAGTTGCCAAT        2       ATGAGGAATTCCTGCgctcacctattagcggctaaggaaattcaaaatgattggcatgtccctcactgtctcttatacacatctgacgct      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC  0
   CAGGGCTGTGCATGCCgcttaaacagca    CAGGGCTCAGCATGCC        2       ATGAGGAATTCCTGCgctcacctattagcggctaaggtgctgtttaagcggcatgcacagccctgctgtctcttatacacatctgacgct      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC  0
   TCGGGTGTCCGACATGactctagtacat    TCGGGTGAGCGACATG        2       ATGAGGAATTCCTGCgctcacctattagcggctaaggatgtactagagtcatgtcggacacccgactgtctcttatacacatctgacgct      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC  0
   TCGAAGTGTCAAAGTAgtaaaaggtacc    TCGAAGTCACAAAGTA        2       ATGAGGAATTCCTGCgctcacctattagcggctaagggagaagtcccaatactttgacgctcacctattagcggctaaggggtacctttt      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC  0
   GTCATCCAGTGAGAGGtcagtgacacct    GTCATCCAGAGAGCGG        2       ATGAGGAATTCCTGCgctcacctattagcggctaaggaggtgtcactgacctctcactggatgacctgtctcttatacacatctgacgct      CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC  0

Result summary.

63.98% (138,246,914 out of 216,070,514) of total read pairs have valid
cell and feature barcodes. Majority of the fragments in this library
have the correct structure.

.. code:: console

   2021-09-30 02:00:26,049 - fba.__main__ - INFO - fba version: 0.0.x
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,049 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Initiating logging ...
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,049 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Python version: 3.7
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,049 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Using extract subcommand ...
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,075 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Number of reference cell barcodes: 13,615
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,075 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Number of reference feature barcodes: 12
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,075 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read 1 coordinates to search: [0, 16)
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,075 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read 2 coordinates to search: [0, 15)
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,075 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Cell barcode maximum number of mismatches: 2
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,075 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Feature barcode maximum number of mismatches: 1
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,075 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read 1 maximum number of N allowed: 3
   2021-09-30 02:00:26,075 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read 2 maximum number of N allowed: 3
   2021-09-30 02:00:29,258 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Matching ...
   2021-09-30 02:16:48,398 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 10,000,000
   2021-09-30 02:33:07,679 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 20,000,000
   2021-09-30 02:49:32,978 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 30,000,000
   2021-09-30 03:05:53,492 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 40,000,000
   2021-09-30 03:22:08,512 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 50,000,000
   2021-09-30 03:38:20,583 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 60,000,000
   2021-09-30 03:54:33,108 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 70,000,000
   2021-09-30 04:10:45,824 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 80,000,000
   2021-09-30 04:26:57,385 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 90,000,000
   2021-09-30 04:43:13,387 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 100,000,000
   2021-09-30 04:59:37,730 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 110,000,000
   2021-09-30 05:15:57,226 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 120,000,000
   2021-09-30 05:32:16,897 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 130,000,000
   2021-09-30 05:48:34,670 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 140,000,000
   2021-09-30 06:04:55,040 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 150,000,000
   2021-09-30 06:21:12,282 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 160,000,000
   2021-09-30 06:37:28,322 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 170,000,000
   2021-09-30 06:53:47,355 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 180,000,000
   2021-09-30 07:10:10,017 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 190,000,000
   2021-09-30 07:26:29,370 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 200,000,000
   2021-09-30 07:42:51,320 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Read pairs processed: 210,000,000
   2021-09-30 07:52:47,851 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Number of read pairs processed: 216,070,514
   2021-09-30 07:52:47,851 - fba.levenshtein - INFO - Number of read pairs w/ valid barcodes: 138,246,914
   2021-09-30 07:52:47,970 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Done.

|

*******************
 Matrix generation
*******************

Only fragments with valid (passed the criteria) cell and feature
barcodes are included. UMI deduplication is powered by UMI-tools
(`Smith, T., et al. 2017. Genome Res. 27, 491โ499.`_). Use ``-us`` to
set the UMI starting position on read 1 (default ``16``). Use ``-ul`` to
set the UMI length (default ``12``). Fragments with UMI length less than
this value are discarded. Use ``-um`` to set mismatch threshold (default
``1``). UMI deduplication method is set by ``-ud`` (default
``directional``).

.. _smith, t., et al. 2017. genome res. 27, 491โ499.: http://www.genome.org/cgi/doi/10.1101/gr.209601.116

The generated feature count matrix can be easily imported into
well-established single cell analysis packages: Seruat_ and Scanpy_.

.. _scanpy: https://scanpy.readthedocs.io/en/stable

.. _seruat: https://satijalab.org/seurat/

.. code:: console

   $ fba count \
       -i feature_barcoding_output.tsv.gz \
       -o matrix_featurecount.csv.gz \
       -us 16 \
       -ul 12 \
       -um 1 \
       -ud directional

Result summary.

88.00% (121,661,177 out of 138,246,914) of read pairs with valid cell
and feature barcodes are unique fragments. 56.31% (121,661,177 out of
216,070,514) of total sequenced read pairs contribute to the final
matrix.

.. code:: console

   2021-09-30 07:52:48,076 - fba.__main__ - INFO - fba version: 0.0.x
   2021-09-30 07:52:48,076 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Initiating logging ...
   2021-09-30 07:52:48,076 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Python version: 3.7
   2021-09-30 07:52:48,076 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Using count subcommand ...
   2021-09-30 07:52:49,463 - fba.count - INFO - UMI-tools version: 1.1.1
   2021-09-30 07:52:49,466 - fba.count - INFO - UMI starting position on read 1: 16
   2021-09-30 07:52:49,466 - fba.count - INFO - UMI length: 12
   2021-09-30 07:52:49,467 - fba.count - INFO - UMI-tools deduplication threshold: 1
   2021-09-30 07:52:49,467 - fba.count - INFO - UMI-tools deduplication method: directional
   2021-09-30 07:52:49,467 - fba.count - INFO - Header line: read1_seq cell_barcode cb_num_mismatches read2_seq feature_barcode fb_num_mismatches
   2021-09-30 07:58:54,696 - fba.count - INFO - Number of lines processed: 138,246,914
   2021-09-30 07:58:54,707 - fba.count - INFO - Number of cell barcodes detected: 13,612
   2021-09-30 07:58:54,707 - fba.count - INFO - Number of features detected: 12
   2021-09-30 18:31:30,172 - fba.count - INFO - Total UMIs after deduplication: 121,661,177
   2021-09-30 18:31:30,208 - fba.count - INFO - Median number of UMIs per cell: 7,663.5
   2021-09-30 18:31:30,457 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Done.

|

****************
 Demultiplexing
****************

Inspect feature count matrix.

.. code:: python

   In [1]: import pandas as pd

   In [2]: m = pd.read_csv("matrix_featurecount.csv.gz", index_col=0)

   In [3]: m.sum(axis=1)
   Out[3]:
   CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC    81595732
   CMO302_CATGCCAATAGAGCG    39999656
   CMO303_CCGTCGTCCAAGCAT        1719
   CMO304_AACGTTAATCACTCA         973
   CMO305_CGCGATATGGTCGGA         167
   CMO306_AAGATGAGGTCTGTG         563
   CMO307_AAGCTCGTTGGAAGA         757
   CMO308_CGGATTCCACATCAT       57738
   CMO309_GTTGATCTATAACAG        2767
   CMO310_GCAGGAGGTATCAAT         236
   CMO311_GAATCGTGATTCTTC         166
   CMO312_ACATGGTCAACGCTG         703
   dtype: int64

   In [4]: m = m.loc[["CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC", "CMO302_CATGCCAATAGAGCG"], :]

   In [5]: m.to_csv(path_or_buf="matrix_featurecount_filtered.csv.gz", compression="infer")

``CMO301_ATGAGGAATTCCTGC`` and ``CMO302_CATGCCAATAGAGCG`` have the most
abundant UMIs. They are the CMOs acutally used in this experiment.

Gaussian mixture model
======================

Cells are classified based on the feature count matrix (CMO abundance).
Demultiplexing method ``2`` (set by ``-dm``) is inspired by the method
described on `10x Genomics' website`_. A cell identity matrix is
generated in the output directory: 0 means negative, 1 means positive.
Use ``-nm`` to set normalization method (default ``clr``). Use ``-p`` to
set the probability threshold for demulitplexing (default ``0.9``). Set
``-v`` to create visualization plots. Use ``-vm`` to set the
visualization method (default ``tsne``).

.. _10x genomics' website: https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/software/pipelines/latest/algorithms/cellplex

.. code:: console

   $ fba demultiplex \
       -i matrix_featurecount_filtered.csv.gz \
       --output_directory demultiplexed \
       -dm 2 \
       -v \
       -vm umap

.. code:: console

   2021-10-01 23:07:30,925 - fba.__main__ - INFO - fba version: 0.0.x
   2021-10-01 23:07:30,925 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Initiating logging ...
   2021-10-01 23:07:30,925 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Python version: 3.7
   2021-10-01 23:07:30,925 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Using demultiplex subcommand ...
   2021-10-01 23:07:45,559 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Skipping arguments: "-q/--quantile", "-cm/--clustering_method"
   2021-10-01 23:07:45,560 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Output directory: demultiplexed
   2021-10-01 23:07:45,560 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Demultiplexing method: 2
   2021-10-01 23:07:45,560 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - UMI normalization method: clr
   2021-10-01 23:07:45,560 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Visualization: On
   2021-10-01 23:07:45,560 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Visualization method: umap
   2021-10-01 23:07:45,560 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Loading feature count matrix: matrix_featurecount_filtered.csv.gz ...
   2021-10-01 23:07:46,353 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Number of cells: 13,612
   2021-10-01 23:07:46,353 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Number of positive cells for a feature to be included: 200
   2021-10-01 23:07:46,400 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Number of features: 2 / 2 (after filtering / original in the matrix)
   2021-10-01 23:07:46,400 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Features: CMO301 CMO302
   2021-10-01 23:07:46,401 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Total UMIs: 121,595,388 / 121,595,388
   2021-10-01 23:07:46,423 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Median number of UMIs per cell: 7,659.0 / 7,659.0
   2021-10-01 23:07:46,423 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Demultiplexing ...
   2021-10-01 23:07:47,160 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Generating heatmap ...
   2021-10-01 23:07:52,192 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Embedding ...
   UMAP(dens_frac=0.0, dens_lambda=0.0, n_neighbors=10, random_state=42,
       verbose=True)
   Construct fuzzy simplicial set
   Fri Oct  1 23:07:52 2021 Finding Nearest Neighbors
   Fri Oct  1 23:07:52 2021 Building RP forest with 10 trees
   Fri Oct  1 23:07:53 2021 NN descent for 14 iterations
           1  /  14
           2  /  14
           Stopping threshold met -- exiting after 2 iterations
   Fri Oct  1 23:08:08 2021 Finished Nearest Neighbor Search
   Fri Oct  1 23:08:10 2021 Construct embedding
           completed  0  /  200 epochs
           completed  20  /  200 epochs
           completed  40  /  200 epochs
           completed  60  /  200 epochs
           completed  80  /  200 epochs
           completed  100  /  200 epochs
           completed  120  /  200 epochs
           completed  140  /  200 epochs
           completed  160  /  200 epochs
           completed  180  /  200 epochs
   Fri Oct  1 23:08:21 2021 Finished embedding
   2021-10-01 23:08:22,267 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Done.

Heatmap of the relative abundance of features (CMOs) across all cells.
Each column represents a single cell.

.. image:: Pyplot_heatmap_cells_demultiplexed_gm.png
   :alt: Heatmap
   :width: 700px
   :align: center

UMAP embedding of cells based on the abundance of features (CMOs, no
transcriptome information used). Colors indicate the CMO status for each
cell, as called by FBA.

.. image:: Pyplot_embedding_cells_demultiplexed_gm.webp
   :alt: UMAP embedding
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

Preview the demultiplexing result: the numbers of singlets (5,614 +
4,712), multiplets (1,505) and negative cells (1,781).

.. code:: python

   In [1]: import pandas as pd

   In [2]: m = pd.read_csv("demultiplexed/matrix_cell_identity.csv.gz", index_col=0)

   In [3]: m.loc[:, m.sum(axis=0) == 1].sum(axis=1)
   Out[3]:
   CMO301    5614
   CMO302    4712
   dtype: int64

   In [4]: [sum(m.sum(axis=0) == i) for i in (2, 0)]
   Out[4]: [1505, 1781]

Knee point
==========

Method 1
--------

Cells are demultiplexed based on the abundance of features (CMOs).
Demultiplexing method ``5-2019`` is our previous implementation, which
tries to demultiplex cells through the detection of inflection point on
the feature UMI saturation curve (`Xie, S., et al. (2019)`_).

.. _xie, s., et al. (2019): https://doi.org/10.1016/j.celrep.2019.10.073

.. code:: console

   $ fba demultiplex \
       -i matrix_featurecount.csv.gz \
       -dm 5-2019 \
       -v

.. code:: console

   2022-01-02 13:52:10,698 - fba.__main__ - INFO - fba version: 0.0.x
   2022-01-02 13:52:10,698 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Initiating logging ...
   2022-01-02 13:52:10,698 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Python version: 3.9
   2022-01-02 13:52:10,698 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Using demultiplex subcommand ...
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,179 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Skipping arguments: "-q/--quantile", "-cm/--clustering_method", "-p/--prob"
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,179 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Output directory: demultiplexed
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,179 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Demultiplexing method: 5-2019
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,179 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - UMI normalization method: clr
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,179 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Visualization: On
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,179 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Visualization method: tsne
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,179 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Loading feature count matrix: matrix_featurecount_filtered.csv.gz ...
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,308 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Number of cells: 13,612
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,308 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Number of positive cells for a feature to be included: 200
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,328 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Number of features: 2 / 2 (after filtering / original in the matrix)
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,328 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Features: CMO301 CMO302
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,328 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Total UMIs: 121,595,388 / 121,595,388
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,338 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Median number of UMIs per cell: 7,659.0 / 7,659.0
   2022-01-02 13:52:13,338 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Demultiplexing ...
   2022-01-02 13:52:14,446 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Generating heatmap ...
   2022-01-02 13:52:15,784 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Embedding ...
   2022-01-02 13:52:32,821 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Done.

Heatmap of the relative abundance of features (CMOs) across all cells.
Each column represents a single cell.

.. image:: Pyplot_heatmap_cells_demultiplexed_knee-2019.png
   :alt: Heatmap
   :width: 700px
   :align: center

t-SNE embedding of cells based on the abundance of features (CMOs, no
transcriptome information used). Colors indicate the CMO status for each
cell, as called by FBA.

.. image:: Pyplot_embedding_cells_demultiplexed_knee.webp
   :alt: t-SNE embedding
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

UMI distribution and knee point detection:

.. image:: Pyplot_feature_umi_distribution_knee_CMO301.webp
   :alt: UMI distribution
   :width: 400px
   :align: center

.. image:: Pyplot_feature_umi_distribution_knee_CMO302.webp
   :alt: UMI distribution
   :width: 400px
   :align: center

Preview the demultiplexing result: the numbers of singlets, multiplets
and negative cells.

.. code:: python

   In [1]: import pandas as pd

   In [2]: m = pd.read_csv("demultiplexed/matrix_cell_identity.csv.gz", index_col=0)

   In [3]: m.loc[:, m.sum(axis=0) == 1].sum(axis=1)
   Out[3]:
   CMO301    4824
   CMO302    4147
   dtype: int64

   In [4]: [sum(m.sum(axis=0) == i) for i in (2, 0)]
   Out[4]: [716, 3925]

|

Method 2
--------

Cells are demultiplexed based on the abundance of features (CMOs).
Demultiplexing method ``5`` is implemented to use the local maxima on
the difference curve to detemine the knee point on the UMI saturation
curve.

.. code:: console

   $ fba demultiplex \
       -i matrix_featurecount.csv.gz \
       -dm 5 \
       -v

.. code:: console

   2022-01-02 13:53:33,250 - fba.__main__ - INFO - fba version: 0.0.x
   2022-01-02 13:53:33,250 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Initiating logging ...
   2022-01-02 13:53:33,250 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Python version: 3.9
   2022-01-02 13:53:33,250 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Using demultiplex subcommand ...
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,723 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Skipping arguments: "-q/--quantile", "-cm/--clustering_method", "-p/--prob"
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,723 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Output directory: demultiplexed
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,723 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Demultiplexing method: 5
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,723 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - UMI normalization method: clr
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,723 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Visualization: On
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,724 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Visualization method: tsne
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,724 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Loading feature count matrix: matrix_featurecount_filtered.csv.gz ...
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,852 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Number of cells: 13,612
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,852 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Number of positive cells for a feature to be included: 200
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,872 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Number of features: 2 / 2 (after filtering / original in the matrix)
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,872 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Features: CMO301 CMO302
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,872 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Total UMIs: 121,595,388 / 121,595,388
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,883 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Median number of UMIs per cell: 7,659.0 / 7,659.0
   2022-01-02 13:53:35,883 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Demultiplexing ...
   2022-01-02 13:53:36,435 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Generating heatmap ...
   2022-01-02 13:53:37,779 - fba.demultiplex - INFO - Embedding ...
   2022-01-02 13:53:56,162 - fba.__main__ - INFO - Done.

Heatmap of the relative abundance of features (CMOs) across all cells.
Each column represents a single cell.

.. image:: Pyplot_heatmap_cells_demultiplexed_knee.png
   :alt: Heatmap
   :width: 700px
   :align: center

t-SNE embedding of cells based on the abundance of features (CMOs, no
transcriptome information used). Colors indicate the CMO status for each
cell, as called by FBA.

.. image:: Pyplot_embedding_cells_demultiplexed_knee-2019.webp
   :alt: t-SNE embedding
   :width: 500px
   :align: center

UMI distribution and knee point detection:

.. image:: Pyplot_feature_umi_distribution_knee-2019_CMO301.webp
   :alt: UMI distribution
   :width: 400px
   :align: center

.. image:: Pyplot_feature_umi_distribution_knee-2019_CMO302.webp
   :alt: UMI distribution
   :width: 400px
   :align: center

Preview the demultiplexing result: the numbers of singlets (5,396 +
4,726), multiplets (1,178) and negative cells (2,312).

.. code:: python

   In [1]: import pandas as pd

   In [2]: m = pd.read_csv("demultiplexed/matrix_cell_identity.csv.gz", index_col=0)

   In [3]: m.loc[:, m.sum(axis=0) == 1].sum(axis=1)
   Out[3]:
   CMO301    5396
   CMO302    4726
   dtype: int64

   In [4]: [sum(m.sum(axis=0) == i) for i in (2, 0)]
   Out[4]: [1178, 2312]

|
